---
title: "Facets"
teaching: 15
exercises: 10
questions:
- "How can we use facets to explore our data?"
- "How can we find problems in our raw data?"
objectives:
- "Use facets to summarize data from a column."
keypoints:
- "Faceting is a useful technique to explore data in a column"
- "A column with dates can be converted to date type for faceting."
---

## Using Facets

Facets are one of the most useful features of OpenRefine and can help both get an overview of the data in a project as well as helping you bring more consistency to the data. OpenRefine supports faceted browsing as a mechanism for

* seeing a big picture of your data, and
* filtering down to just the subset of rows that you want to change in bulk.

A 'Facet' groups all the like values that appear in a column, and then allow you to filter the data by these values and edit values across many records at the same time.

Although you may not be familiar with the term 'facet', you have most likely experienced this kind
of filtering before. Two great websites that offer searching using facets:

* <https://epl.ca>
* <https://amazon.ca>

One type of Facet is called a 'Text facet'. This groups all the identical text values in a column and lists each value with the number of records it appears in. The facet information always appears in the left hand panel in the OpenRefine interface.

Here we will use faceting to look for potential errors in data entry in the `Branch Name` column. We know for a fact that there are only 22 branches at EPL that have participated in this data set.

1. Scroll over to the `Branch Name` column.
2. Click the down arrow and choose `Facet` > `Text facet`.
3. In the left panel, you'll now see a box containing every unique value in the `Branch Name` column
along with a number representing how many times that value occurs in the column.
4. Try sorting this facet by name and by count.

> ## Exercise
> Do you notice any problems with the data? What are they?
> > ## Solution
> > - There are 48 different values ... but only 22 branches!
> > - `Calder Branch` is likely the same branch as `Calder`.
> > - `Woodcroft Branch` is likely the same branch as both `Woodcroft (Westmount)` and `Woodcroft (Westmount) Branch`.
> > - `MacEwan Lending Machine` refers to the same place as `MacEwan University` and `MacEwan University Lending Machine`.
> > - There are `1230` rows with an empty branch name.
> > - and ...
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

Hover the mouse over one of the names in the `Facet` list. You should see that you have an `edit` function available.

You could use this to fix an error immediately, and OpenRefine will ask whether you want to make the same correction to every value it finds like that one. But OpenRefine offers even better ways to find and fix these errors, which we'll use instead. We'll learn about these when we talk about clustering.

> ## To Fix!
> We have now identified some data to clean:
>
> * There are inconsistencies in the branch names.
>
> We'll explore some strategies to tackle this in a later section.
{: .tofix}

### Using Facets to filter data

Facets give an excellent summary of the data in a data field, but they are also useful
for choosing what data we want to look at.

> ## Try it!
>
> Use `include / exclude` to select only entries that match selected branches.
>
> 1. In the facet (left margin), click on one of the names, such as `Abbotsfield - Penny McKee`.
>     Notice that when you click on the name, or hover
>     over it, there are entries to the right for `edit` and `include`.
> 2. Click `include`. This will explicitly include this branch, and exclude others that are not
>    explicitly included. Notice that the
>    option now changes to `exclude`.
> 3. Click `include` and `exclude` on the other branches and notice how the entries appear and disappear
>    from the table.
> 4. **Invert**: You can look at data at every branch **except** for the currently selected facets.
>    The `invert` button to the right of `Branch Name` makes this easy. Pressing it twice
>    returns the previously selected facets. 
> 5. **Reset**: After playing around with some of the facets, remove all selected facets so
>    that we have a full dataset to work with. The `reset` link to
>    the right of `Branch Name` in the facet panel will quickly do this.
{: .challenge}

## Dates and timelines

Lets look at our date column `As of Date`. We would like to facet this column, and there is a facet
type called 'Timeline facet' that would probably be a good fit, but when try to add this type
of facet, we get bad results (and we notice that the facet panel says there are 33321 rows of
type `Non-time`).

The issue here is that the `As of Date` column is considered to hold text data, and not
time/date data. We can add a `Text facet` instead, and doing so we discover how many unique choices
for dates there are in the dataset. (You may get a 'too many to display error', and a `Set choice
count limit` link. Use the link to increase the limit to 1000).

Look at the ordering of these facets. Are these in chronological order?
The day-month-year formatting of the dates ensures that dates on the first
of the month are first, ordered by the month the date is in, then the year.

We can fix this by converting the type of the data in the column to 'date' type.

1. Remove all facets on the `As of Date` column.
2. Convert the type of the data in the column to `date` using
   `Edit cells` > `Common transforms` > `To date` from the `As of Date` column menu.
    Notice the data in the column is now green.
3. Use faceting to produce a timeline display for `As of Date`. Play with the handles to filter
   the data by date 
4. Create a second facet on the date column using the `Custom Text Facet` option with the
   expression `value.toString()`. This produces a new text facet for the dates, but the
   values are in chronological order! Play with the handles of the timeline facet to watch
   these new facet values change.

> ## Questions about our data
>
> 1. Using the custom text facet created above, how many different `As of Date` values there are in the data set?
> 2. What are the first and last weeks that data was collected?
> 3. Are there any periods where data was not collected?
>
> > ## Solution
> >
> > There are 164 unique dates in the dataset.
> >
> > The first data collected was from February 2015, and the most recent data is from October 2018.
> > 
> > Notice there are holes in the data for late 2016 and the early half of 2017. 
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## More on Facets
> [OpenRefine Wiki: Faceting](https://github.com/OpenRefine/OpenRefine/wiki/Faceting)
>
> As well as `Text` and `Timeline` facets, OpenRefine also supports a range of other types of facet. These include:
>
> * Numeric facets
> * Custom facets
> * Scatterplot facets
>
> **Numeric and Scatterplot facets** display graphs instead of lists of values. The numeric facet graph includes 'drag and drop' controls you can use to set a start and end range to filter the data displayed. These facets are explored further in [Examining Numbers in OpenRefine](http://www.datacarpentry.org/OpenRefine-ecology-lesson/03-numbers/)
>
> **Custom facets** are a range of different types of facets. Some of the default custom facets are:
>
> * Word facet - this breaks down text into words and counts the number of records each word appears in
> * Duplicates facet - this results in a binary facet of 'true' or 'false'. Rows appear in the 'true' facet if the value in the selected column is an exact match for a value in the same column in another row
> * Text length facet - creates a numeric facet based on the length (number of characters) of the text in each row for the selected column. This can be useful for spotting incorrect or unusual data in a field where specific lengths are expected (e.g. if the values are expected to be years, any row with a text length more than 4 for that column is likely to be incorrect)
> * Facet by blank - a binary facet of 'true' or 'false'. Rows appear in the 'true' facet if they have no data present in that column. This is useful when looking for rows missing key data.
{: .callout}

> ## Exercise
> Add a text facet on the 'Branch Name' column on top of the 'As of Date' timeline
> facet construced above. Do you see any patterns on the timeline graph when looking
> at branches with duplicate names?
> > ## Solution
> > Quite often the coding of branch name will change over time.
> > For example, `Calder Branch` is used in earlier data records in the set, whereas
> > `Calder` is used in later data samples.
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

{% include links.md %}
