---
title: "Cleaning by Clustering"
teaching: 10
exercises: 10
questions:
- "How can we find and correct errors in our raw data?"
objectives:
- "Use clustering to detect possible typing errors."
- "Understand that there are different clustering algorithms which might give different results."
keypoints:
- "Clustering in OpenRefine can help to identify different values that might mean the same thing."
---

## Using clustering to detect possible data entry problems

In OpenRefine, clustering means "finding groups of different values that might be
alternative representations of the same thing".

For example, the two strings `New York` and `new york` are very likely to refer to the
same concept and just have capitalization differences. Likewise, `Gödel` and `Godel`
probably refer to the same person.

Clustering is a very powerful tool for cleaning datasets which contain misspelled or mistyped
entries. OpenRefine has several clustering algorithms built in.
We will experiment with them, and learn more about these algorithms and how they work.

We will use clustering to fix the branch names in our data.
To ensure consistency, we should think about how we want to standardize the naming of branches.
To this end, let's adopt the following convention:

**We would like to avoid the use of the word `Branch` and `Library` in a branch name whenever an alternative name is.** This convention matches the trends noticed in the data (older records have the word `Branch` in them, newer ones don't).

1. In the `Branch Name` Text Facet we created previously, click the `Cluster` button.
2. In the resulting pop-up window, you can change the `Method` and the `Keying Function`.
   Try different combinations to see what different mergers of values are suggested.
3. Select the `key collision` method and `metaphone3` keying function.
   It should identify several clusters.
4. Click the name that you feel should be set for each cluster found
   (for example, click on `Woodcroft (Westmount)`). Notice that the checkbox `Merge?` is selected now.
5. If there are clusters that you don't think should be merged together, don't click anything --
   and make sure that the `Merge?` checkbox is **NOT** selected.
6. When you are finished reviewing the clusters, click `Merge Selected and Recluster` to apply
   the corrections to the dataset.
7. Try selecting different `Methods` and `Keying Functions` again, to see what new merges are
   suggested. For example, somce reasonable clusters are found by selecting method
   `Nearest neighbor`, distance function `PPM`, and radius `2.0`
   (with default `Block Chars` set to `6`). `Merge Selected and Recluster` as needed.
   Try again with a higher radius: you should find some good matches are found and some
   bad ones.
8. If you know of other duplicates that you find hard to detect with the clustering options,
   you can still merge these similar values. You need to hover over them in the `Branch Name`
   text facet, select edit, and manually change the names. The `MacEwan University` /
   `MacEwan Lending Machine` should be a bit tricky.

## But what about those blank branch names?

The last item in the `Branch Name` facet panel has the name `(blank)`. The branch name
has not been included.

We have a couple of options:

* Remove these records;
* See if we can figure out the branch ourselves some other way.

We can remove the records by selecting the `(blank)` facet, the going to the menu at the
top of the `All` column and selecting `Edit rows` > `Remove all matching rows`.

But luckily we have another field to fall back on to do some detective work: the `Branch ID`
column.

If we add a text facet to the `Branch ID` column and select the `(blank)` value in
the `Branch Name` panel, we see that the blank branch names only have two different
branch IDs: `EPLMCN` and `EPLWHP`.

We can reverse this information: if we now select `EPLMCN` in the branch ID panel,
we see that there are only two branch names that have this as a branch ID:
`McConachie` and `(blank)`. From this we can conclude that `EPLMCN` is the
branch ID for `McConachie`.

Let's fill in the missing data:

* Make sure that the `(blank)` branch name facet and the `EPLMCN` facet are selected.
  We are told that there are `450` rows that match these two filtering conditions.
* Go to the first row in the data displayed and allow your mouse pointer to hover over
  the blank `Branch Name` cell. As you hover, the word `Edit` appears. Click it.
* A dialog appears. Type 'McConachie' in the dialog, and press the button
  `Apply to all Identical Cells`
* You will see that the `(blank)` facet now says there are `0` matching rows, and
  the `McConachie` facet count has increased by `450`.

> ## Exercise
> Using the same technique as above:
>
> 1. How many rows with blank values for the branch name have the branch ID set to `EPLWHP`?
> 2. Which branch does `EPLWHP` correspond to?
> 3. Fix these blank branch names.
>
> > # Solution
> >
> > 1. Selecting the `EPLWHP` branch ID facet and the `(blank)` branch name facet should
> >    give `780` rows.
> > 2. `EPLWHP` corresponds to `West Henday Promenade (Lewis Estates)`.
> > 3. This is done in the same way as was done with the blank values for the McConachie branch. 
> >
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

## Different clustering algorithms

The technical details of how the different clustering algorithm work can be found at the link below.

[More on clustering](https://github.com/OpenRefine/OpenRefine/wiki/Clustering-In-Depth)

{% include links.md %}
