---
title: "Splitting data"
teaching: 15
exercises: 20
questions:
- "How do we deal with multiple data in a single field?"
objectives:
- "Learn to split data"
- "Recover from problems when modifying data"
keypoints:
- "OpenRefine can break apart columns that hold multiple data"
---

## Splitting data

As we've noticed, the `Title` column holds more than just a title.
After the title of an item, there is a slash character (surrounded by spaces). We can tell OpenRefine to look for patterns to use as **delimitters** of separata data items.

* Remove all facets and filters on the data.
* Go to the menu at the top of the `Title` column.
* Select `Edit column` > `Split into several columns ...`
* Make sure that `By Separator` is selected
* For the separator, type in ' / ' (a space, a slash, and another space)
* Press 'Ok'

The `Title` column is now gone and replaced by three columns:
`Title 1`, `Title 2`, and `Title 3`. The `Title 1` column does appear to hold the title, `Title 2` appears to hold author information, but `Title 3` appears to be blank.

We can facet on `Title 3` to find out what data it holds (create a text facet). We discover that every row is blank except for one: `Joshua Williamson, Tom King ...`.

If we click on that row, we discover that the `Title 1` is `Batman`, and `Title 2` is `The Flash : the button, deluxe edition`.

Let's undo the column split to see what's going on.

If we now do a text filter on the `Title` column and search for `batman`,
we find a number of matches, in particular `Batman / The Flash : the button, deluxe edition / Joshua Williamson, Tom King, writers ; Jason Fabok, Howard Porter, artists ; Brad Anderson, Hi-Fi, colorists ; Deron Bennett, Steve Wands, letterers`.

The problem here is that the same set of characters that is used to split the title and author information is also used inside of a title!

We can fix this:

* Hover over the Batman title and click on `edit`.
* Replace `Batman / The Flash` with `Batman/Flash` in the title.

Remove the filter and split the column using ' / '. We now just
get two columns `Title 1` and `Title 2`.

We can now rename the columns: in the `Title 1` header menu,
go to `Edit column` > `Rename this column`, and change the name to
`Title`.

The `Title 2` column can be named to something like `Title Extra`.

{% include links.md %}
